Resilience of Foreign Students Focus Group Discussion
Date: July 2nd, 2016
Time: 10.40am – 12.40pm
Location: Singapore Management University 
Participants: 5 (2 male, 3 female)
	3 NUS, 2 SMU
	1 Malaysian, 1 Indian, 3 Indonesians 
	21 – 24 years old
Focus Group Transcript:
Facilitator (F): Thank you guys so much for coming down. So as Jethro has mentioned, we will be talking about resilience and different topics about resilience. We would like to hear your opinions of, and experiences with, staying in Singapore so far. We will be audio recording the session but there will be no names mentioned in any of the presentations or reports. If there are no further questions, I will be handing out a consent form for everyone to sign. This is also for your own assurance in knowing that confidentiality will indeed be ensured. 
We will be having a discussion about various topics from henceforth; please do not feel pressurized about this focus group, you can take it as quite an informal time of sharing with one another. If at any point in time you do feel uncomfortable about a particular topic that we’re talking about or you feel that you do not wish to elaborate further, just let me know, that is not a problem as well. But otherwise, there are no right or wrong answers. There are also no specific answers that we are looking for as well; we would just like to hear your honest thoughts. 
Shall we start first with introductions from everyone? Please share your name, where you are from (your country of birth) and how long you’ve stayed in Singapore. 
TA: I’m Indonesian, and I’ve been in Singapore for nine years. 
IS: I’m Indian, and I’ve been here for a total of six years but it was three years in my primary school and three years now in university.
TP: I’m from Malaysia, and I’ve been here for six years since 2010. 
AD: I’m from Indonesia as well, I’ve been here for about 18 years. 
AJ: I’m from Jakarta and I’ve been here for 15 years. 
F: Thank you everyone. We shall now start off the focus group with a simple activity. On the whiteboard we have nine different items on the left side. Once you have read the items, please use the post-its here and stick them on the board accordingly to indicate your ratings. So on a scale of 1 to 7, indicate the extent to which you feel based on those items, 1 being the least strongly and 7 being the most strongly. For example the first item, “the extent to which you are personally prepared to handle a crisis in Singapore” – 1 would be that you do not feel prepared at all, and 7 would be that you feel extremely prepared for a crisis. 
AJ: What kind of crisis though? 
F: A crisis here refers mainly to nation-wide events, so they can refer to economic crises, natural disasters, terrorist attacks. If you feel like you are prepared to handle different types of crisis differently, then we can explore that further as we come back later to discuss. 
– Activity –
F: Thank you for participating in the activity. Looking at the board, quite a lot of the ratings seem to steer to this side [closer to 7] so I think it would be interesting to discuss further. I could see that there were some questions that arose during the activity, for example what “preparedness” means. So as we discuss deeper, let’s see whether or not you guys feel that you want to change or move your opinions [the post-its] and we’ll see whether or not there’s a change at the end of the discussion. 
– 10:20mins –
F: Let’s start off with the first one – when we talk about crisis management, what are your perceptions about what being prepared means? 
AJ: For me, when I was thinking about it I was just thinking of staying alive. So that’s why I had asked what kind of crisis this was dependent on. 
F: So for everyone else, did you think of it the same way too? Just staying alive, passing by; so did anyone have a different interpretation of how you saw it?
AD: I think it’s more like the resources that you have to be able to handle the crisis. So for example, say there is a terrorist attack, do you know what you can do during a terrorist attack. That’s what I feel the preparedness means, whether you know the procedures, where to get the information from, and whether you have adequate preparedness for in case you cannot go out or something like that. 
TA: Yeah, I agree. Like mobilization of resources. For example, if there is another disease outbreak, like something like SARS, would people know what to do, would announcements be clear, what would the procedures and everything be. So yeah, I think of the mobilization of resources. 
AJ: I think the reason why I changed it [my rating] to four was because I was imagining a scenario where there was a terrorist attack and the communication systems are down and there’s no Internet also – I know as Singaporeans, we rely a lot on online resources. We’ll Google what should I do and that’s how we’ll get information out to people, but if the Internet is down I think it’s much more difficult for us cause we’re not used to gathering as a community. Like in HDB flats, we don’t usually come together to give out instructions, so that part I think it’s still bad in terms of preparedness. 
F: Does anybody share the same views or any differing views? 
If not, let’s say for example, since there are differing sorts of crisis – let’s first talk about a health epidemic. Were any of you guys around when it was the SARS outbreak in Singapore? [Some participants respond yes] So if something like SARS were to happen again, where a very big health issue broke out again, do you guys think that you would be able to handle it? Do you think that you have enough access to information from the government for example, or from our leaders or your peers? Such that you would know if there were closures of any places or certain procedures that you had to take note of – for example, taking your temperature every certain number of hours and things like that?  
AJ: Yeah, I guess they would just put things like that up on the Internet or something like that and we would all have access to that. 
F: Would most of you guys rely on the Internet for your source of information? 
[Participants all express agreement]
F: Are there any other sources that you guys would rely on? For example if it was a case where there was no Internet or you were not able to access the Internet?
TA: Newspapers.
AD: I would ask my friends. 
AJ: Same, that or the news probably. 
IS: I think there’s one thing with all these kinds of situations – the spread of information is quite fast so even if you don’t read the newspaper you would just see it on TV. So I think there’s no real chance that you won’t have access to any information because it spreads very far and wide.
F: Let’s say for example in Japan when the great earthquake happened, there were actually several reports about how university students in that area had difficulty accessing information because a lot of the news was reported on the local news which was in Japanese. Most of these students had a basic understanding of Japanese, but it wasn’t at such a high level for them to understand the news. So what happened was that they ended up hearing a lot of the news from their family members back in their home countries, and the way that the news was reported in these countries sort of differed from each other. Do you think Singapore might face a situation like that? Or do you think that the language barrier is not as much of a problem here?
AD: I don’t really think language is much of a problem here, in the sense that English is a language that is used most often so everyone should have at least a basic understanding of it. If you see the television and the radio, they have their own channels where they speak in their own mother tongues also, so even if you don’t understand English you can still listen in your own mother tongue and so it shouldn’t be a problem I think. 
 AJ: Yeah, it wouldn’t be as big of a problem because our country is so small so whatever you hear from friends it’s easy to pass information around to one another. But in Japan you have people in the outskirts also, so it’s more difficult to control what kind of information you get. 
IS: I think here like most things it’s a very top-down approach, so as far as the accuracy of information goes, it’s not like if there was a terrorist attack one source of information would say that there are 70 people there and another source would say that there were 20 people there. You know so there is just that one source of information that disseminates most information so I think that way, there wouldn’t be too many issues of misinformation. In other countries there are all these concepts of citizen journalists and that is a more bottom-up approach and in those cases there might be a lot of different stories, but I think here that may not be an issue. 
F: If for example you heard differing news between what was being reported in Singapore and what was being reported in your home country, perhaps it’s not that either information was right or wrong but rather that the news was being reported in different ways because they view the situation differently. So like referring back to the Japan example, Japan focused a lot on portraying the news by putting forth the message that the country needs to stick together and take care of each other, while the overseas news focused a lot more on it being a dangerous situation and that people need to evacuate and that sort of thing. So if it were a situation like that where you were hearing different kinds of news like that, would you feel conflicted or do you feel like you would end up trusting or relying more on one particular source of information? 
TA: I think in this example though, it’s just the news being reported from different angles rather than it being conflicting. It’s just that the local news focused more on calming people down, whereas outside news was more focused on telling people the facts, that an earthquake had happened and what is happening in the cities. So I wouldn’t feel as conflicted if that were the case. 
AJ: I would probably just take the two sources of information and see which one was more applicable for myself or my family. So if Singapore news said the situation was okay but I felt like it would be safer taking myself and my family to Jakarta then I would just do that. It would just depend. 
F: So just now [Participant IS] mentioned about Singapore being a mostly top-down approach, and the news being mostly reported by the government. I see that most of you guys also put quite a high rating for trusting the leaders of Singapore – would anyone like to elaborate more on your rating? What are the sort of factors that lead to that level of trust?
AD: For me it’s just that I’ve been here for so long and I haven’t seen like a major issue where they’ve completely covered up something and then been exposed for it. Maybe if they do then definitely the confidence level would drop a lot, but as of now there’s no such reporting. So based on my experience, I think it’s still okay. 
AJ: Yeah, I think in comparison to our own countries, we can trust the leaders here more. 
IS: Yeah, back in my home country, everyday there is a new scandal being reported about the politicians. In comparison, it’s easier to trust the leaders here. 
F: Are you guys aware of your community leaders? Like do you know the difference between the community leaders and the national leaders? 
[Participants all say no]
F: So the community leaders are like the grassroots leaders, the grassroots advisors, the CC chairman, while the national leaders are like the Prime Minister, the President and the Parliament leaders. 
– 20mins –
AJ: I don’t know my community leaders. 
F: Is it the same for everybody? 
[Participants all express agreement]
F: Then if I were to ask specifically about your trust in the community leaders and your trust in the national leaders, would there be a difference? 
AJ: Subconsciously I lump both groups together when I think about the leaders of Singapore.
F: In case for example there was a crisis situation in Singapore, let’s say maybe there was a threat of a terrorist attack, would you turn to your community leaders for help or would you try to seek more of the official sources like the national leaders? 
[Participants all express agree with the latter option as their choice]
F: How do you guys view the responsibilities of the community leaders? Cause for the most part the idea of community leaders is to be closer to the people on the ground because the national leaders are more of the ones on the top trying to oversee everything while the community leaders try to give more of a closer feeling. So would you feel that there is anything that you would want from the community leaders in that sense?
AD: I don’t know the community leaders and I don’t have any expectations from them because I don’t know them at all and I haven’t heard of them doing anything around my area. I do know that they follow the instruction from the top management, which is probably the national leaders, so I guess they are doing what the national leaders are asking them to do but only on that level. And so if they tell me something I would think that that is something what the national leaders are telling them to do. I will still listen to them but I don’t think that there is any kind of special reason why I would listen to them other than the fact that they are listening to instructions from the national leaders who are ordering them to do so.
TA: I guess one expectation of them is that they can react to the immediate needs of the residents in my area efficiently and effectively with the resources available. Whereas the national leaders oversee and give instructions to the community leaders who fix the issues of the smaller areas.
F: Would you guys feel like it would be beneficial for you to have more knowledge of the community leaders and more interaction with the community leaders, or do you feel like as of right now with the status quo, it doesn’t make much of a difference? So for example, seeing into the future in case of a crisis you would still be able to cope even without having that direct interaction with them. 
TA: I guess it would help to know more about the community leaders because in times of crisis they could kind of guide you.
F: So if we go along these lines and look at item number 5, there is also quite a high rating of confidence. So for you guys are the factors also quite similar to the factors that led to your trust in the national leaders? 
[Participants all express agreement] 
F: Is there anything in particular that you expect quite strongly of from the leaders? What would make you lose your confidence in the leaders? Would it be something like a very big occurrence that would cause that confidence to drop or do you think there’s something else?
TA: I guess if there is internal division within the government, that can affect my trust as well and lack of transparency. 
AJ: I think more of hiding information, like essential information in time of crisis.
F: Do you guys think that in time of crisis the leaders might withhold information? Not that they would lie about it but for example withhold the extent to which how serious the crisis is. 
IS: I think it’s only being practical because you can’t make people think that the island’s on fire or something so it could just be them being smart by withholding some information to a certain extent. So yeah, it doesn’t mean that they’re lying but it’s just knowing when and where it’s the right time to share certain information.
AJ: I think we would only think that it is worth distrusting them when something bad happens as a result of them hiding that information.
F: So do you think that currently the Singapore government handles that balance quite well?
AJ: I think there haven’t been much opportunities [for them to have to handle crises]. 
F: Let’s move on to the next topic. In terms of integration into the Singapore society, we look at item three – would anyone like to elaborate on whether you feel like you are a part of Singapore?
AJ: I have been living here for so long that I think I mostly consider myself more of a Singaporean than an Indonesian actually. 
TP: For me cause I grew up in Malaysia and the culture is pretty close so when I first came here there wasn’t really much of a difficulty adapting in that sense, and as time passes I think I now have more friends in Singapore than in my home country so in that sense I feel more connected here than back there.
AJ: For me I think language plays a really big role. My Bahasa is really horrible so if I go back to Jakarta, I would feel less connected as I will be speaking in my broken Bahasa and sometimes I’ll try to add in some English. So in that way I feel more connected to Singaporeans because like [Participant TP] said, most of my friends are here and it’s easier to communicate.
F: [Participant] TP, you said you were here for six years? 
TP: Yes
F: And [Participant IS], you were here for six years too, so would you say that it is the same for you?
IS: I don’t think so because for me, my family and my friends and everyone are back home. I have been here for three years now, the previous three years when I was here I was just a kid so I’m just going to omit those. So right now I’ve been here for three years but all my best friends are back home. I am really grateful to be able to study here but my heart is back home.
F: The rest of you have family members here also?
[Some participants express agreement] 
AJ: Actually my parents are working in Indonesia but we always see each other every two weeks or so.
F: What sort of aspects are uniquely Singaporean that makes you feel quite connected? 
AJ: I think the “chia-ba-lan-ness” here (melting pot). I feel like when you’re here, you get to meet all types of people easily. I think it is easy to feel part of it because it is such a small country so you will know enough aspects of it to feel like you know this place, just because it’s so small and it’s so easy in that sense. 
F: Are there any aspects of Singapore that you feel proud of?
TA: It’s safe even for girls to walk around alone at night, which is not the case even if you go to safe countries abroad it might still not be that safe for a girl to walk around alone. It’s also clean and it is very convenient here.
– 30:05mins –
IS: I think the way they really maintain every system, like the public transport and everything, it’s all very efficient. So it is very convenient and useful.
F: Then on the contrary, is there anything that you don’t feel proud of or disappointed with, possibly even ashamed of Singapore?
TA: I guess sometimes you come across rude people, actually very often.  
IS: Yeah, I think it could also be the case of… I don’t wish to generalize but if I were to compare this to back in India for example. Like I think both of these are kind of wrong, but it’s like here if you were in a public place like at the MRT or something, say for example here if someone were to fall down on the road where a crowd is walking by, in general the crowd would just walk pass, at least I’d sense that. Back home, it is the exact opposite and it is equally annoying when like a million people would stop and surround the person. But I think it’s just that empathy for even a stranger, I think that’s one thing that’s sort of lacking here. 
AD: I think the bureaucracy here is a little… I don’t know, everything takes a long time. As in for a country that prides itself on efficiency, there is something lacking. And then probably like sometimes I feel that they don’t do enough to help their own people, like the ones who are very disadvantaged. I understand that you all have to set a limit on the minimum or maximum salary every month of a family before you can help them, but I think it just dehumanizes the people to being just like numbers. In that sense I am not very fond of the government in that area.
F: Anyone else have anything to add? 
TA: I guess one other issue is how the system is very disadvantageous of certain people like the low skilled migrant workers. I think there is obvious favour for people who are high skilled or talented as opposed to the low skilled migrant workers who receive very little profit I guess you could say.
AJ: Yeah I feel like one thing, but it’s not like specific to Singapore, it’s like only when people start talking about the issue, especially like foreign migrant issues now there’s far more people talking about it now so the government has been responding more and talking about it more during their speeches and such. But actually the problems have existed for such a long time, but it’s only when people started talking about it and the government becomes scared, that they start talking about it also and decide to try to solve the issue. It seems that is one issue, the foreign migrant issue, and then now it’s like the refugee issue. Because the government they usually don’t talk about it normally at all. So when someone asks them, they will dismiss it and say that we don’t have the resources so we can’t have all this, so that’s like the only thing they can say. So that’s why now it’s more of trying to raise awareness amongst ourselves, for Singaporeans first to be more vocal about it then the government can respond. So I guess it’s about waiting for people to say something.
F: Does anyone have anything to add to that? With regards to the government waiting to respond to people’s complaints, that people have to voice something out first rather than taking the first step to bring it up.
TA: I guess that [not taking the first step] may be required for some issues, like some sensitive issues, but other aspects – I can’t think of an example now but other aspects, they usually are quite proactive, so I think it is based on what the topic is. 
AJ: I don’t know, I feel like it’s a lot of little things here. I mean not about the government, but just like being in the same lift with your neighbours but not talking to each other, like that kind of culture that seems to be present now all the time. We just don’t seem to have that “kampong” spirit anymore. But it’s just a difference in culture. 
F: So to build onto that point, apart from your social network being made up of your friends and family members, but in terms of your wider community like your neighbours, do you think that in times of crisis people would reach out to help one another? Or do you think people would only help their immediate network of friends and family members?
AJ: I think people would still help each other out. I think cause some of us, we still see each other every day. We don’t really talk much to each other, but we still know that the other person exists. Sometimes we say hi. So I guess in times of trouble, I think we would still help each other – but as in it depends what sort of help also. It depends how far you want to go out of your way to help your neighbours if you don’t talk to them on a daily basis, but probably you would still be willing to help them with like little things. 
AD: I think it also depends on like your ability to help them as well. Like for example, I would prioritize my family and friends first, but sometimes your friends are not very near to you, so even if you wanted to you can’t really help them. So you can instead help someone who is nearer to you. But let’s say I have friends who are staying very near to me, maybe not as near as my neighbour, but I would still prioritize going to my friend to help them first. So I think it depends on quite a few factors as well, as to whether you would help your neighbours first or just leave them first and come back if you do have the time to help them. 
F: To what extent do you guys think you can rely on your neighbours? 
AJ: It depends on what kind of situation. Like if it were a survival thing, then maybe yes. But like if it were a financial crisis, then I wouldn’t think they would see the need to help as much I guess. Yeah, it depends on the situation. 
F: Let’s say it’s just a simple situation like you had to evacuate the building. Do you think you can rely on your neighbours, if for example you had gotten injured while trying to evacuate, could you rely on your neighbours to help ensure that you were able to leave the building safely? 
TA: I think that they would help. Or like they would help at least until they see your family members or someone else attend to you.
AJ: I feel like in situations where it can be seen that you obviously need help, then they would help. But in other situations where it was less obvious that you need help, then they wouldn’t go out of their way to find out whether or not this person needs help. But yeah, if it was clear right before them then they would help. 
F: In Singapore if we were to talk about your social network system, who would you guys say you rely most on?
AD: Friends. 
AJ: My sisters.
TA/TP: Yeah, friends.
F: When talking about your friendships in Singapore, earlier on a couple of you mentioned that you are friends with quite a lot of Singaporeans – are you guys friends with other foreigners as well? Do you feel that you have more close friendships with Singaporeans or other foreigners? 
– 40mins –
AD: Singaporeans. It just so happens that in my class usually I’m the only foreigner, like from primary school. So maybe there was just no chance in the first place to make friends with other foreigners. 
AJ: It’s quite a mix for me. 
TA/TP: Mixed as well.
IS: Actually I have a lot more Singaporean friends, but my closest friends tend to be Indians also.
F: Is there any way in which you wish your social support system could be improved? For example in a crisis situation, if we go back to the topic of being prepared to handle it, maybe now we talk about handling it emotionally or mentally – do you think that your social support system now is sufficient for you to handle any emotional stress that you may feel? 
TA: Are we talking in terms of crisis or just in general?
F: Let’s talk first about in general, before moving on specifically to a crisis situation. 
TA: I guess family and friends are sufficient. 
F: So in terms of a crisis situation, you would feel the same with regards to it being sufficient as well?
AJ: For me yeah.
TA: Maybe not… Because your family members may also have their own emotional trauma to deal with during a crisis so maybe external service providers would be helpful during such a time. 
F: Based on your current social support network – looking at all the friends that you have – if your family members were not here, so for example you were staying in Singapore over an extended period of time by yourself, do you think the situation might change?
[Participants express agreement]
F: How so?
AJ: For me personally I don’t have any close friends so my closest friends are really my sisters, my two sisters, and maybe my second sister’s boyfriend. Other than that maybe some people from school or JC, but those are really very few so I guess in times of crisis without my family, that core support is kinda taken away. 
F: So in that case how would you cope in times of crisis?
AJ: As in now?
F: Let’s say for example there’s a terrorist attack and you are lost as to what you should do and you don’t have enough information and you panicked about what the outcome is going to be and how the situation is going to turn out and you are not sure where you can go for help.
AJ: I guess first I will reach out to my closest circle of friends. If I feel that my house isn’t safe, maybe I’ll go stay at someone else’s house that is more ‘ulu’, whereas I stay in an HDB flat so maybe I’ll feel more vulnerable in the case of a terrorist attack. Then maybe once I’ve ensured a secure position, then I’ll check online maybe for some online articles about what I should do. I guess that’s the second source of information. 
F: And how would the rest of you cope? If your family were not with you in Singapore? 
TA: I guess it’ll be similar to her [Participant AJ].
F: If we talk about a more general situation like let’s say in school you are really stressed about an assignment or you are close to failing a module, you don’t know what to do and you just want somebody to talk to – if your family was not in Singapore, would you reach out to your friends or would you feel like you would want to contact your family members instead?
AJ: I think I would reach out to my friends.
TA/TP: Yeah [agreeing with Participant AJ]. 
AD: I think for modules… Usually I don’t talk about school with my family. They just want to know whether I pass or just the overall results and whether I have made it to the next level, that’s good enough for them so we don’t really talk about results. But I mean if I do feel very stressed out, I will talk to them but I won’t necessary talk about the results or about my studies, but more of like just talking to them and then when I feel better I can just go on to do my work. But if you want to find someone to complain to about your results, usually I will find my friends to complain about it because they can relate more to the situation.
F: I see that the satisfaction with life in Singapore, item number eight… Do you guys see as [rating] four as neutral or four as just being on the continuum of the rating scale? 
AJ: I just saw four as being closer to seven. 
F: So you see four as closer to seven? And you see four as quite a high rating? 
AJ: Yes
F: Is that the same for everyone else?
AD/TA: I see four as a neutral rating. 
F: So what aspects would cause you to put that particular rating for your satisfaction with life in Singapore? Like what parts in Singapore have allowed you to feel satisfied with?  
TA: I can do things on my own here. If I’m in Jakarta, I can’t just go out whenever I feel like it. Usually my mom will insist for me to be driven around because it’s unsafe to walk around on the streets alone. And so over there I kind of have to follow her schedule because she needs the car as well, so I can’t just go out whenever I feel like it whereas here I can just go out when I want to go out. There’s that independence aspect because it’s safe. 
F: So actually I’ve heard quite a number of you keep mentioning about the safety of Singapore. And like when I give situations or examples of terrorist attacks, it’s quite hard to actually imagine in Singapore. So if we go back for a moment to the topic of crisis preparedness, do you guys think or actively prepare for possible terrorist attacks in Singapore?
[Participants express disagreement]
F: Because you think it’ll be safe here? Do you think then – because a lot of Singaporeans probably think in a similar manner, whereby they don’t think it’ll ever happen here – do you think that will pose a problem for us? In terms of crisis preparedness. 
TA: It probably would in a sense.
TP: I think so because it’s like when you are not expecting it and it suddenly hits you, you probably won’t know how to react. Whereas like back home in Malaysia there’s always a lot of crime happening, so people are always sharing with each other tips about how to react to these cases or how best to circumvent them. So because you are expecting to get robbed or whatever, so you do have that certain level of preparedness. Whereas over here, I think it would just be a bit sudden. 
IS: I think yes, the fact that it has been safe for so long and people are so used to a certain level of comfort and that kind of thing. I think that if you stay here long enough there may be a sense of complacency that sets in where you think that ‘oh yeah nothing’s going to happen’. But if at all a crisis was to take place I think the systems that have been put in place are very efficient so it won’t be everyone’s gonna be running around like a headless chicken not knowing where to go or what to do. So yes I think it would be a shock, but it won’t be like the country would not be able to handle it. 
– 50:02mins –
AJ: I think it will only be dangerous if you see things happening but you don’t believe it. But I agree that what he [Participant IS] said about complacency. Cause like in Jakarta, we are very expectant of robberies. Like my dad places a metal pole in every corner of our house, just in case you get cornered you have something to reach out to. So I think if you’re talking about physical threats, it can be dangerous if you don’t have such a set up before it’s too late. 
F: Do you think from your own country you bring along certain knowledge or tips on crisis preparedness over with you?
IS: I think yes, but I’ve never had to actually… Because back home in my city there are a lot of issues with like the power getting cut off or flooding during the rainy seasons, and so you get used to having to go for a few days without electricity. And we’re used to it, so we know how to deal with it. But thankfully here, there’s clearly never been such a situation before like that. But I think that if a situation was to arise like that, if you are used to it I do think that you bring along those kinds of things [tips] with you. But I mean I think it is awesome that we’ve never had to actually utilize that here. 
F2: So is it safe for me to say that you are prepared for certain crisis that you have faced before in your own homeland?
IS: Yes, I guess. 
F2: Anyone of you have anything to say about your preparedness in your homeland, like he [Participant IS] is prepared for electricity failure so he probably has torchlight or batteries? And possibly Singaporeans, we don’t have because it’s not common. 
TA: I know how to prepare for an earthquake because when I was young in Jakarta there were a few earthquakes as well. So I know to go under the table or don’t go out of the building in case something collapses, that sort of thing. And flooding, flooding also happens very frequently and so we have those lights that run on batteries [rather than electricity] and we have a lot of spare batteries, and a first-aid kit as well. 
AJ: I think for me, I’m much less prepared than my parents. I always hear when there’s a flood in Jakarta, but I’m always never there. Maybe I am more prepared for earthquakes? Not because I experienced it in Jakarta but like from stories from my parents because they studied in LA and there were a lot of earthquakes there. And so they will tell me what is needed so I guess I learn from other people’s stories. But I think in terms of crises in Jakarta, I’m much less prepared to handle them because I’ve never actually experienced them myself. Unlike my parents, they’ll know what to do and so I would probably just listen to them. 
F2: Keeping that in mind, when you come to Singapore do you mentally prepared yourself for possible crisis that might happen, or like stock up basic necessities?
AD: I have a lot of dried foods. But it is just a habit as I do have a lot of snacks as well so it kind of doubles up in case you cannot go out. And my mum likes to collect torchlights so I think we have more than 10 in the house. It’s a bit of a hassle to maintain all the torchlights but I understand where she’s coming from because we do have a lot of blackouts in Indonesia, and it can happen like twice a week – so it’s a very common thing. But I think the most important thing is having the experience of going through this kind of things will make it less likely for you to be overwhelmed in case the crisis happens again which is the more damaging part in terms of crisis and the damage it can deal to you.
IS: I think it’s actually a lot more about mental preparedness than physical preparedness. Like back home it’s not like we’re always stocked up on food and torchlights, but I think it’s just that we’re used to it. So even if there was a blackout in the middle of the night and there was just one candle in the house, my family would light it and just sit around it. You know nothing’s going to go wrong when your family is together. So I think it’s more about that mental preparedness, like so you don’t really need all the torchlights in the world as long as you have that. 
F: Do you think that there is anything in Singapore that we should particularly be prepared for? 
TA: Like in a crisis or? 
F: Like for example natural disasters are not as much of a concern here but recently for example we have the minor flooding events, and I think especially when it first started, everyone sort of panicked about it cause we never really see this sort of situations before so quite a lot of Singaporeans didn’t really know how to react to it. 
AJ: Not being complacent about terrorist attacks. 
IS: I think especially since recently they caught someone who was linked with ISIS or something like that, so that might be a potential scare for people. 
TA: But I think the government is more prepared for like terrorist attacks or disease outbreaks rather than natural disasters. It’s like that’s what you see in the news, especially after all these terrorist attacks abroad, you always have another separate column saying that Singapore must always stay vigilant. So I guess they analyse the current affairs abroad meticulously and relate back how they should be prepared. So I guess that’s how they are prepared in that sense, but natural disasters you can’t predict that and so far I don’t think there has been earthquakes here. But there have been earthquakes in Malaysia and Indonesia, so there might be natural disasters in so far as there might be small tremors. 
F: Do you think there are any particular areas or ways in which we can improve on our preparedness? Maybe even just mentally, mental preparedness rather than just physically, like preparing items.
AD: I think it is very difficult to prepare mentally especially when you have no experience of it. I mean like they say in terms of a terrorist attack these are the things you should do, but in an actual terrorist situation it is very difficult for you to imagine how you will be able to think up of the procedure itself and then being able to execute the procedures and the steps that you are asked to do so. I think that will be one of the problems that people will face, especially if the first terrorist attack that Singapore faces is a large scale one then I think it will be very devastating, but if they have like a small terrorist attack then people will be able to learn more easily and will be able to handle the future situations a lot better. But I think the mental preparedness part is very difficult because it is very safe, they [Singaporeans] can’t even learn from like normal crimes in that sense.
– 1:00:30–
IS: It is also more like a terrorist attack is a one-off kind of thing whereas something like say flooding or something for instance, at least in countries or cities where they’re used to like when the rainy season comes then it will probably be flooded – so you know that’s more like a yearly, a seasonal thing so they can get prepared for the experience compared with a terrorist attack which is a one-off thing. And even if I were to tell you today that here are ten things you should to do during a terrorist attack, you can’t prepare for something that’s never happened.
F: Do you think people can learn from incidents from other countries?
AJ: I think it depends on the person. It is one thing to be aware, but another to know how close that situation is to us. Some people may not even think that it’s possible to happen here. I think in terms of like instructions and preparedness, like knowing what to do, when and where, I think because we have not experienced those kinds of problems here, people might not actively look for that kind of information. Even if it is given to them like a leaflet or a flyer, they won’t treat it as an important thing because they know that it is not going to happen soon. So if it is information that you want people to know it probably has to be quite eye-catching or worth looking at, or even putting it in an entertaining manner that can go viral as opposed to just like a website or infographic so people can take note of it. 
TA: Maybe like one possible way, but this might be very impractical, is to have like drills. So for example like in my primary school in Indonesia, we have earthquake drills where we have our lessons as normal, the teachers will know but the students won’t know, then they will announce that we are having an earthquake now and we just have to go under the table, wait until someone from the intercom say the earthquake is over and we come back out and resume the lesson, things like that because knowing and doing are very different things. I might say I know this, it’s so logical, but when you are in a new crisis or you panic sometimes you can’t think, so I think one way is to have drills. I mean it might be very impractical, but it’s just one possible way. 
F: Actually building on that point, for example when I lived in America we often had lockdowns and bomb drills, and also other drills for things like natural disasters as mentioned. In Singapore more or less the only things that we have are fire drills. Do you think it will be beneficial for Singapore to expand on that or do you think it might cause unnecessary concern in that sense?
AJ: Depending on what type of crisis I guess. So like probably not for earthquakes because realistically it might not happen and the probability is much lower than for like a terrorist attack. So depends also on the general response. 
AD: I think one possible problem would be… I don’t know which country did this drill, but they made this terrorist say some Muslim words, some words from the Quran, and it caused quite a big hoo-hah on the Internet. If Singapore was to do something like that and if it didn’t take into account the different factors then it could cause an outrage from different communities. So that might be something that you would have to think about if you want to do the drills. And of course I think people will think such drills are impractical because they do have confidence that Singapore is a safe place so they might think that doing the drill is impractical and a waste of time.
F: With the increase in terrorist activity around the world lately, actually the Singapore government has been trying to be more proactive in terms of putting forth messages about preparedness and movements to address these issues, how do you think the current reactions are of the people of Singapore? Like first of all do you think people are aware of these campaigns that are going on? Do you think the awareness differs across age groups?
AJ: I think personally I haven’t taken much notice of it, it’s selective attention. I think many people also won’t really know what’s happening unless you are in school or you are involved in drills probably. I think, especially if you were like a working adult, you wouldn’t really take note of this kind of things. Actually what is the government doing?
F: There’s actually this initiative called SG Secure.
AJ: Mmm, I don’t know this. 
TA: Is it recent? 
F: It is quite recent.
AD: They are still in the process of launching it. 
IS: I’ve only seen health related ones. Like the dengue one, with the five-step mozzie wipe out or something like that. I’ve not really seen any related to like the threat of terror and those sort. 
TA: I guess one other reason is because we view these terrorist attacks as something that is happening far away like in the US or in Europe. It is geographically really far so you don’t feel threatened by it, you may feel it’s horrible and you rally behind it but you don’t really think much about how it can happen in Singapore. 
F2: If you were in school and there’s a man wearing a vest loaded with bombs in your school, what would you do?
AD: I will run away.
AJ: Run away with my friends. 
TA: Is a bomb or a gun?
F2: If it’s a gun, would you still run? 
AJ: Depends on where he is.
TA: Yeah, depends on where he is. 
F2: You don’t know where he is.
AJ: Then I’ll run away.
AD: I will hide in the toilet or something like that, as in I will find a place to hide. 
AJ: I will try to get away from the school, like as far as possible.
TA: I’ll probably hide. Because when you’re running down you might come across him. 
AD: And then you can probably message someone and ask them to call for help, if it’s convenient for you to call. If you’re hiding and you don’t want him to know, you can message your friend and get him to call the police or something like that. 
F2: In that situation, if you see a fellow Singaporean student who say to you to run here, would you follow?
TA: Depends on where he is running 
AJ: Yeah! [In agreement with Participant TA]
IS: I think it’s just like that point in time you’ll want to trust someone, you’ll trust anyone who seems to know what they’re saying. 
AD: I think it’s not a matter of whether he is Singaporean, because you can’t determine just from his voice whether he is Singaporean or not.
AJ: Yeah.
AD: It is more of whether this person has an association with the person who is attacking us. If you think that there is no problem with him then you will probably just follow his instructions. 
AJ: I think in the event of a shooting I will be so unprepared because most of us would probably have never seen a gun pointed at us before and I would like just panic and stay still. Whereas people in the US maybe they are more used to it so they would be more willing, those capable of it, to charge at the person and to tackle them down, everybody would tackle them down. I watched this video of in the event of a shooting, what should you do, so I guess Singaporeans won’t be able to do that – to do what they tell us to do because we’ll just be super scared and shocked.
– 1:10:18–
F: Then in a case of really unexpected situation like that do you think Singaporeans would mainly panic and do what their instinct tells them to do, for example like to run, or do you think would listen to instructions, like to stay put or to hide? Based on them having never experienced anything like that.
TA: People would panic, I would panic.
AJ: I would panic too.
TA: Depends on who is the one giving the instructions, if it is someone I can trust like a lecturer from SMU I would probably trust them. But if it is just a random guy who happens to walk around SMU who say come here, I would say no! So it is the credibility of the person. 
AJ: I think you would be more willing to trust someone if you know the person and you know the person is trustworthy. But in a state of frenzy all you can think about is staying alive and the first instinct is just to flee, so you would probably just run. 
F: So if you were in school, do you think that your school faculty would be able to handle such situations? Do you think they will be as panicked as the students themselves?
TA: Maybe they would have some procedures in place, perhaps, we would never know because we don’t know if they’re prepared or not. I’m pretty sure they do have procedures in place in case something happens, but it is just whether they can execute it well is the only issue. 
AD: Our school will send us a lot of notice like your emails, like for example what is the hot news this week so they will pass on information about very recent events. If there is a terrorist attack they will send us an email about it, so they probably have information about such terrorist attacks and stuff. But the staff themselves are not trained in a sense, so it is difficult to rely on them as well to be able to conduct the safety procedures safely.
IS: I think this applies for all other kinds of organizations as well – at least when they join, maybe not regularly, but employees generally must be made to attend a workshop on what they should do in case of an emergency. So I think they would definitely be more prepared than us who have never been exposed to learning about what to do in emergencies. 
AJ: There are so many types of different situations, so I wonder whether they would be able to remember [the procedures for dealing with each kind of situation].
IS/TA: Yeah. 
F2: Do you guys know what number to call if you’re in danger?
AJ: 995? Eh, what’s the police number?
IS/TA: 999
AJ: Oh 995 is the ambulance is it?
F2: Yeah and fire-fighters. 
AJ: Actually does it matter who you call? Then they can direct your call accordingly afterwards.  
F: Have any of you guys participated in any drills in school?
All: Fire drills.
AJ: Wait, as in our current schools?
F: Yeah
All: Then, no. 
AD: They ask us to ignore the fire drill. We were having lecture, and the lecturer said this is just a fire drill, let’s just continue on with our lesson. 
AJ: In NUS I’ve never [participated in any drills] because I don’t stay in hall. But I think in halls they have them quite often.
TP: Yeah, for halls they do fire drills very frequently. Then if you live on the 17th floor you have to walk all the way down. 
F: Do you find the process quite efficient and clear?
TP: Yeah I guess also cause I’m used to it already. Everyone just takes the stairs down and gathers at a certain point, and then they’ll come and do a roll call.
F: So you’ve never had a fire drill in their current main school building before?
All: No.
F: Are you guys aware of when the fire drills happen? Do they inform you guys?
IS: For SMU, they send emails. And tell you the exact date and time.
AD: For NUS we don’t really take notice. We don’t read all the emails because they send us a lot everyday. 
F: Do you guys think it is a good strategy, informing us such that we can avoid them? Or do you think there would actually be benefits to have a legit drill so that people will be able to learn how to respond?
AJ: Actually I think informing is better, because if you get used to getting surprised, when it actually happens you might just think it’s a drill. 
TA: I think not informing would be better. 
TP: In my dorm, they don’t tell us. Because they tried telling us before and everyone just got out of the building first. 
TA: Actually what happen in my primary school was that they told the students and teachers about the fire drill and we took our time in coming down the stairs. So we got scolded by the principal and everything, and after that they never told us, they just told the teachers. So ever since then we would hurriedly go down the stairs to see whether it is real or not.
AD: I think maybe they could make a specific range. If they want to tell the school this week we will have a fire drill, but they won’t know which day of the week so you can’t like purposely not go to school and not be there. 
F: Actually I want to move back a bit regarding awareness of all the campaigns. Like [Participant IS] mentioned that he is aware of the health campaigns, do you think awareness of these kind of health campaigns are higher? Or do you think it is not that high actually?
AD: It is definitely higher than the terrorist ones because you have SARS and H1N1 and now you have the Zika virus, so I think there is more of a sense of urgency for them because it could happen because something has happened before so they take more notice of this kind of like health issues as compared to like something that is far away from them.
F: So do you think the difference in awareness level is more of how urgent people view the issue is as opposed to how the campaign is actually doing? 
– 1:20:04–
AJ: Yeah, selective attention I guess.
TA: Also I think the terrorist campaign, the SG Secure? I think it is a relatively new one so it might not be like everywhere yet whereas posters of dengue and other stuffs, because they have been around for a long time you see them everywhere.
F: If for example we wanted to push for the urgency for the campaign on raising awareness on the threat of terror, do you guys have any suggestions on how that can be done? What would personally get your attention?
AJ: I mean it wouldn’t work for me if it is just a poster on what you should do. Maybe more of making people think that the problem is actually closer to us, so like what they already do like in the news they relate it to Singapore. Maybe it could be something else like what is the probability of having a terrorist attack in Singapore, maybe people would pay more attention to that? Then they would realize that it is something they need to be prepared for and then they’ll start looking for information and that’s where the websites and all with the relevant information would come in. 
IS: For the dengue campaign, they indicate around neighbourhoods whether it is a yellow zone or red zone for dengue clusters. If you are in the yellow or red zone you are more likely to pay more attention to the ways to prevent it from happening. For terrorist attacks you might be scaring the people if you categorized areas as “red zones” for example. It might scare a lot of people but there must be ways to make it seem like it is real. 
TA: Actually as we are talking about terrorism, I remember that I took a module on sociology of terrorism in SMU and it turns out that there was a terrorist attack in Singapore back in the 1970s. But the terrorist did not have much interactions with Singaporeans, I am not sure, I think they were from the Palestinian terrorist group. I think they kidnapped someone, I can’t remember, but there was a terrorist attack. And so the lesson from that terrorist attack is that Singapore is not invulnerable to terrorist attacks and event from outside Singapore can still affect Singapore as the people were from the Palestinian terrorist organization. So I think like educating people of that event can shatter the illusion that Singapore is invincible to terrorist attacks, like we didn’t know that and everyone was shocked when we learnt about it. 
F: Looking at item nine, everyone chose the same rating. I feel a duty to protect and defend Singapore, so would you like to share about this?
AD: Four was just neutral for me.
F: Is there a reason why it is neutral and not on either end?
AJ: Actually what do you mean by protect and defend?
F: How did you interpret it?
AJ: I was quite confused because I was thinking about different aspects of protecting the country. One way could just be being proud of Singapore, so other people putting Singapore down, whether you verbally defend and stick up for Singapore. That aspect of protecting Singapore is stronger. Another aspect is like wanting to join the army, that kind, maybe not so much. 
F: if we just look at those two aspects – if we look at just the first one first, like you see people around you talking badly about Singapore, bringing Singapore down, would your rating still be four in terms of defending Singapore in that sense?
TA: Yeah, probably, yeah.
AD: I think it matter more about what they are talking about Singapore in the first place. I mean if it is legit, if they have a basis for criticising Singapore then there is nothing to defend. I mean even if they are talking badly of Singapore, if there is a basis for that criticism then it might be justifiable in that sense – although they might not need to say it so harshly. If you can understand where they’re coming from, I don’t think there’s a need to defend. But if they are using some unjustified basis… you might still not correct them as usually we are just minding our own business. So it is a culture here that is very difficult to break, you attract a lot of attention if you confront them and say this is not what it is.
F: What if it was for example like a friend of yours who just came to Singapore for the first time, would you feel like, then it is not so much attracting attention, would you still stay neutral in terms of responding? If they made negative comments.
AD: If they are friends they would probably tell you why they think it is like that. So if they say Singapore is very bad, they will tell you why it is very bad then I guess you could try to see from their point of view, you could tell them your point of view, but I don’t think it works very much to change their mindset unless they could experience the good side of Singapore on their own. Probably just more of telling them some of the stuff that you’ve experienced in Singapore, but not in the hopes of changing their mindset. 
AJ: Because you understand that it is based on their first impression, especially if they are only here for a few days, it can be quite deceiving. So yeah, not so much of trying to convince them but sharing another side of it [what they haven’t experienced].
AD: So like for example if they think very nicely about Singapore, you would also tell them some things that are not so good about Singapore so that they don’t have an idealized version of Singapore. Cause they might be disappointed if they stay longer, or something like that. So for both sides it’s like that. If they talk only about the bad stuff, I’ll tell them about some of the good stuff. If they only talk about the good stuff, I’ll feel obligated to share some of the not so good stuff as well. 
F: Then if we talk about the other type of defending, maybe not to the extent of joining the army, but maybe joining community groups? Maybe during a terrorist attack, people join groups to hand out food and water to people, or if it was a health crisis, handing out masks, do you feel that sort of duty?
AJ: If I know that they need more people, then yeah. 
– 1:30:00–
AD: If my friends asked me, then I would probably go. It is very sad to go on your own, it would be like I don't know anybody there, and then I don’t know. And in the first place a lot of us don’t know the community leaders, it will be uncomfortable approaching them to offer help but there was someone to go with you at least, you would feel more at ease.
IS: For me I think it would be my priority to ensure that both I and my family are safe first, then when that is proven and we can help, then I think yes we can go out and help others. But the first thing is to ensure that your close family and friends are safe. 
AJ: I think because of the task also. If I think the task is very important, maybe like with giving out masks I would think it’s useless because people can just get it themselves, then I wouldn’t want to do it unless it’s like a survival thing. So yeah, it depends on the task also.  
F: I’ll ask this quite honestly. Would you want to, for example, volunteer to help out because you feel connected to Singaporeans and that’s why you want to help them or is it more because in general you want to help people who are facing trouble? Is it sort of a connection to Singaporeans that makes you want to help my fellow people or is it just that people are having difficulty, that is why I want to help?
AJ/TA: In general.
TP: I think it’s a bit of both. Like in general you want to help people facing difficulty, but if you do feel a connection to people around you it kind of reinforces it. 
F: Does that feeling change if you were in your home country? Like your motivation to help others.
AD: But in Indonesia I would be more wary of helping people.
TA: Yeah [in agreement with Participant AD]. 
AD: Because sometimes, I mean we do hear a lot of stories of people helping people and they end up getting robbed so there is a lot of considerations to take note of as well. Like they have a lot of scams like asking you to lend them your phone for a while, and they just press a number to call and all the money in your card disappears, that kind of thing. So they do have a lot of different kinds of scams so we get more wary in our own country than in Singapore. So there is a bit of a difference as well. 
AJ: I guess we might be saying yes now, but it might not be the case when it actually happens. I don’t know, it depends on the situation. 
F: Item number seven is rated quite highly, can you share what type of stereotypes you think Singaporeans have of foreigners? 
TA: I would say there are different stereotypes for different nationalities. Like the ones that I hear most often are Filipinos, mainland Chinese and Indians, and most of them are not very desirable attributes. Indonesians… I guess there are also a few stereotypes of Indonesians. There are a few people who approach me and tell me that you are not a real Chinese because you can’t speak Chinese, it’s like stereotyping or racism, I don’t really know what you would call it. But just comments like that. 
AJ: For Chinese-Indonesians, if you’re not a scholar then people think you must be really rich. 
AD: They talk about the haze as well sometimes. It’s not like we’re the ones burning down the forests. 
TA: Yeah. When I was in JC, one of my classmates asked me why don’t you just tell your government to stop the haze and because I was really annoyed, I said ‘do you think I have the president’s number in my phone’, so yeah things like that. 
AD: But I don’t think we [Indonesians] have it as bad as like the mainland Chinese.
TA: Yeah.
AD: Or like the Indian foreign workers. They have nicknames for them like “Ah Tiong” [Mainland Chinese] or Bangala, it sounds very derogatory.
TA: Maybe we don’t have it as bad because when we don’t talk we look like locals. As Indonesian Chinese, we blend in quite well. It’s only when we open our mouth and people will say, you are not Singaporean are you? So we don’t really get that much hate I would say. But I have seen my Indian friends and my Filipino friends get remarks such as, why are you here, you are going to be a maid anyway so why bother studying. Not in university, in upper secondary school.
AJ: Were they being serious or were they joking?
TA: I guess they were like half joking, but of course she [my friend] didn’t take it well. Even if it was a joke, it’s a very offensive one. 
AJ: Yeah, I think it’s especially so when a race is being attached to what they do – so like foreign migrant workers or foreign domestic workers.
IS: I think at the end of the day it’s all about not taking yourselves so seriously. Cause the same thing would also be like how we foreigners also have stereotypes of Singaporeans. Everyone holds stereotypes of everyone else. I think it’s all about understanding, and not generalizing it to everybody – like just because one person from mainland China is like this, not everyone from mainland China is like that. So I think that it’s best, in my personal opinion, to try not to take these things very seriously. Like if someone makes fun of my accent – like sure, I have a different accent so you would make fun of it. Person A can make fun of Person B’s accent, but Person B can also make fun of Person A’s accent. I guess it’s all about increasing your tolerance of other people also. But stereotypes, everyone holds stereotypes – whether consciously or not. 
AJ: Yeah, I think things like you not wanting to work with this person just because there’re from a particular country – these kinds of misconceptions. I think it is important to know that we can always learn from these people even though they have another way of working – it’s another way of looking at things. For example, in school we have exchange students and some of us may be less willing to work with an American because we think that they are more lazy, so that kind of thing but it is important to bear in mind that we can also learn from their perspective and how they look at work.
F: Has anyone of you ever thought that you were treated differently in Singapore because you are a foreigner? It can be in school or out of school.
– 1:39:51–
IS: Occasionally when you’re in public, like I don’t usually go around by taxi but sometimes there’s the usual comments of ‘oh you’ve come from India to take our jobs’ or something. I don’t take it very offensively, but it is a bit annoying to hear. Like if they hear your voice and they’re like ‘oh so you’re not Singaporean’, that sort of thing is a bit off-putting I guess. 
AD: In general, not really. But there have been a few incidents here and there. Also in the taxi. For me, I was fetching my cousin from the airport so on the taxi we spoke Bahasa and then like I was telling the uncle in Mandarin to go straight [直走; literally “walk straight”], but then he said but we are not walking. Then I was telling him as long as you understand why do you need to make such a hassle, because Singaporeans do say in Mandarin “go straight”. I am just following the Singaporean context, but he knows that I am not Singaporean. So like I was thinking if it was a Singaporean who is on the car as a passenger, he wouldn’t say anything about it. It was the fact that I spoke Bahasa to my cousin and he knows that I am not a Singaporean, and that’s why he did that. Because he said something like, “don’t try to use Chinese when you don’t understand Chinese” and so I said, ok, whatever. And then he farted inside the car and it was very smelly. I would say this kind of incident is very rare, but it’s just that it does happen occasionally. So if you are unlucky to meet a few times of these you would probably have like a negative impression of Singapore forever.
TA: I have experiences where I have been treated differently, where it is a good thing and a bad thing. One example where it was a good thing was for my Chinese exams. I took Chinese as my mother tongue but my conversational skills suck, and so whenever I have to take an oral exam I would always emphasise that I am from Indonesia, and they could tell from my IC as well, so they tend to give me a little bit of leeway even though I don’t make any sense, I don’t even know what I am saying and yet at the end of the day I can still pass and that’s because I think they give me a little leeway. And my Chinese teacher even says so, they told me to say that you’re a foreigner, they will probably be more lenient on you and I guess that’s how I passed my Chinese all these years. The bad side is comments like why are you here? You are taking up our space, our housing spaces, things like that. Or saying that you are not a real Chinese, or asking why aren’t you dark if you are from Indonesia. 
IS: Yeah, same [regarding last comment of why aren’t you dark].
AJ: I feel like if I get these comments, I won’t think anything because they’re just like a joke to me. Even if they mean it, I’ll just be laughing at them and not be bothered with them.
IS: I think this goes back to the thing earlier that we talked about. Like if someone makes a racist comment towards you, it is nothing about you but instead it is showing their small mindedness so you don’t have to take offence to it. You just have to understand that it is their fault.  
F: Do you think that such stereotypes or such incidents might create the risk of division in the Singapore community between Singaporeans and foreigners?
AD: I don’t think it’s that serious in the sense that even these people who are making those remarks are in a very small minority in the first place. It’s just that these incidents get highlighted very often so it seems like there is a lot but actually there is not a lot and I think the scale of these events are not very big as well so it doesn’t really affect in the long run unless there’s like another Little India kind of incident. But if there are more of these kinds of riots and people continue to do these kinds of things, it will sort of amplify the effect of the major incidents instead. 
AJ: Yeah I think like within our own personal circle, I don’t know anyone who’s specifically against any particular race. But I think the more stereotypical thoughts are among the older generation who may tend to generalize, but it is less common among our age group. 
F: Have you guys ever thought of leaving Singapore before?
[All participants express agreement]
AJ: I was thinking that maybe in the future there is a chance that I will be somewhere else. 
TA: Yeah probably to live somewhere else.
AD: I want to work in another country. 
IS: My friends and family are back home so… [I intend to go back]. 
F: Is there any particular reason why you want to live somewhere else? 
TA: It’s less stressful, less competitive. For example, in New Zealand people are like so chill about everything, that’s what I like. The city I went to [for exchange], Christchurch, is less crowded as well, it’s very quiet. I kind of like it, it’s a nice change. So things like that. 
AJ: I think I don’t have a specific country in mind, but it’s more of thinking that I can be somewhere else and being able to experience and to have a different perspective. I mean I’m glad that I’ve been here for a really long time as opposed to going overseas to study, so I’ve been able to learn more about Singaporeans and how the culture here is like. I would want to be able to explore the same somewhere else also, like for another aspect of my life. It’s not particularly that I am eager to leave. 
AD: I wouldn’t mind working in Singapore but I wouldn’t want to retire in Singapore. I feel like if I retire, the cost of living will be too high for me as compared to going back to Indonesia, I can live a much better life in that sense because the cost of living is much lower there so you can afford to have a higher standard of living over there with the same amount of money.
TP: For me it is also similar. I don’t really have any immediate want or plans to leave the country. I wouldn’t mind working here, but in the event if there is a better job opportunity or even if it’s just a change of scenery after a while, then I might consider leaving the country but otherwise not really.
AJ: Yeah I think what would really propel me to go someone else would be a job opportunity. 
F: On the other side of the coin, what are the reasons that compel you to stay in Singapore?
TP: For me, my elder sister is here. So it’s like part of my family is here and it’s close to Malaysia so it’s easy for me to be here working and also see my family once in a while.
AD: For me is more of friends because I am only living with my sister. So if she goes back then I will be all alone here. The thing linking me to Singapore then are probably just my friends. 
– 1:50:01–
AJ: Yeah I guess for me the reason would also be because of family because I’m staying here with my two older sisters. I can see myself going somewhere else because my two sisters are about to leave already, so I’ll be the only one here. So there’s less that would be tying me to Singapore. But it’ll be dependent on what kind of job opportunities there are. 
TA: It is the distance between Singapore and Indonesia as well. It’s really convenient so if there is any emergency it is easy to just go back. 
IS: My dad is here so…
F2: Do you feel that there is enough representation of foreigners here in Singapore? Like do you feel that your needs are taken care of by someone other than yourself?
TA/AJ: What kind of help?
F2: Like in some areas the community leaders actually actively help the foreigners living in their area. Like if they have housing issues they will help them out, that kind of stuff. 
AJ: I personally wouldn’t know, because I haven’t gone out of my way to try to find help for these kind of things. Unless it’s for like subsidies, but I’m a PR. 
TA: I wouldn’t know either, but from what I know my parents settle everything on their own. Or they will ask their friends who have lived in Singapore for a long time, not so much from any leaders. 
AD: We don’t even know that there was help available so we just don’t ask for it. 
F2: Then do you all know where your country’s embassy is in Singapore? 
[All participants express agreement] 
F2: So in the event when you need help would you approach them? 
AJ: What kind of help?
F2: If there is a racial riot, that kind of stuff.
AD: Nope.
AJ: I wouldn’t think of it. 
AD: I would just hide in my friend’s house, it’ll probably be safer. 
TA: Unless it has something to do with your citizenship. Like if it was a specific attack against Indonesians for example, then maybe the embassy can help you. But other than that, I think I’ll just stick with the Singapore sources of help, like the police first. 
F: Does anyone have anything you want to add or any question you want to ask?
[No further questions from participants]
F: Ok, thank you all very much for your time. 
– 1:53:30–
End of Focus Group Discussion. 

